you're listening to a teaching from Reality LA.
We're in a series right now on the Book of Acts.
This is the story of the movement of the early church throughout the Roman Empire.
We want to see the same thing happening right here in Los Angeles.
And today we're looking at Acts 16, talking about how to plant a church in a pagan city.
So imagine with me for a minute that you go into a new big city and quickly realize
that there is not one Christian in the entire city.
And you're a follower of Jesus.
You want to be faithful to the Lord there.
You know that you need Christian community.
What do you do?
How would you introduce people to Jesus?
Would it even be possible to start a church there?
Well, in Acts chapter 16, that's exactly what Paul and Silas do.
They go to a city called Philippi to plant a church.
And Philippi was a Roman city in Greece.
And it was urban, pluralistic, and utterly pagan.
They lived their lives to the glory of Greek and Roman gods.
They spent their time in theaters and gyms and learning the latest theories.
They followed their desires, and none of them had ever heard about Jesus.
And so, Philippi is very different than where we began in the book of Acts in Jerusalem.
Philippi
There are zero followers of Jesus.
There are hardly any Jews there.
There's no synagogue.
They live there with their ultimate loyalty to Caesar.
And yet, Paul and Silas are going there to plant a church.
Now, obviously, Los Angeles is not a city with zero Christians.
I'm so grateful for the many churches in our city and for the generations of believers who have gone before us in this city.
But in a lot of ways, Los Angeles feels more like Philippi than Jerusalem.
This is a global city, an urban, pluralistic, power-centered city, a city shaped by image,
influence, desire, money, and status.
A city where loyalty is not expressed to Caesar, but to career, platform, self-expression, or politics.
And it's a city where people aren't asking, how can I follow Jesus?
They're asking, how can I build my life?
And increasingly, most people in Los Angeles genuinely don't know anything about Christianity.
And so here we are.
a church that was planted 20 years ago, planted by brave men and women who pioneered and sacrificially moved into the heart of the city proclaiming the good news of Jesus.
And by God's grace, 20 years later, we're still here.
And so this passage is going to teach us not only how to plant a church in a pagan city, but how to thrive as a church in a pagan city.
So let me read this passage for us and then I'll open our time with a word of prayer.
It's Acts chapter 16,
verses 11 through 40.
Acts chapter 16 starting in verse 11.
So, setting sail from Troas, we made a direct voyage to Sumothrace and the following day to Neapolis and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of the district of Macedonia and a Roman colony.
We remained in this city some days
And on the Sabbath day, we went outside the gate to the riverside where we suppose there was a place of prayer and we sat down and spoke to the women who had come together.
One who heard us was a woman named Lydia from the city of Thyatira, a seller of purple goods who was a worshipper of God.
The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by Paul.
And after she was baptized and her household as well, she urged us saying, if you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come to my house and stay.
and she prevailed upon us.
As we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a slave girl who had a spirit of divination and brought her owners much gain by fortune telling.
She followed Paul and us crying out, these men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to you the way of salvation.
In this, she kept doing for many days.
Paul, having become greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.
and it came out that very hour.
But when her owners saw that their hope of gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.
And when they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, these men are Jews and they are disturbing our city.
They advocate customs that are not lawful for us as Romans to accept or practice.
The crowd joined in attacking them and the magistrates tore their garments off them and gave order to beat them with rods.
And when they had inflicted many blows upon them, they threw them into prison, ordering the jailer to keep them safely.
Having received this order, he put them into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stalks.
About midnight, Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
And suddenly, there was a great earthquake so that the foundations of the prison were shaken.
And immediately, all the doors were opened and everyone's bonds were unfastened.
When the jailer woke and saw the prison doors were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul cried with a loud voice, do not harm yourself, but we are all here.
And the jailer called for lights and rushed in and trembling with fear.
He fell down before Paul and Silas.
Then he brought them out and said, sirs, what must I do to be saved?
And they said, believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your household.
when they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to all who were in his house.
And he took them the same hour of the night and washed their wounds.
And he was baptized at once.
He and all his family.
Then he brought them up into his house and set food before him, before them.
And he rejoiced along with his entire household that he had believed in God.
But when it was day, the magistrate sent the police saying, let those men go.
And the jailer reported these words to Paul saying, the magistrates have sent to let you go, therefore come out now and go in peace.
But Paul said to them, they have beaten us publicly, uncondemned men who are Roman citizens and have thrown us into prison.
And do they now throw us out secretly?
No, let them come themselves and take us out.
The police reported these words to the magistrates and they were afraid when they heard that they were Roman citizens.
So they came and apologized to them.
And they took them out and asked them to leave the city.
So they went out of the prison and visited Lydia.
And when they had seen the brothers, they encouraged them and departed.
This is God's word.
Pray with me.
God, we believe that it's your same Holy Spirit that's at work in Los Angeles today as he was in Philippi 2000 years ago.
We believe that we're a part of this same story of the book of Acts and that you are the same God who is still changing lives and drawing people together.
And so Lord, we pray that we would experience the same power of the gospel right here today in this place.
God, we are desperate for you to move.
We pray that you would reveal yourself, that you would open hearts, that you would draw us together and that you would make a genuine, powerful impact on this city.
full of people who don't know you, but are longing for you.
So God, show us yourself in this time.
We pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.
All right, so last week, we picked back up in Acts in the second missionary journey of the Apostle Paul.
And if you remember a little bit from last week, they launch out on this missionary journey and it says that the spirit forbid them to go in one region and then close the door for them to go into another region.
But then Paul had a vision from a man of Macedonia and he concluded that God was calling them to the city of Philippi to preach the gospel there.
And so like I mentioned earlier, Philippi is a Roman city
in ancient Greece, and there's zero believers there.
But Paul and Barnabas are on a mission, on Christ's mission, to bring the good news of the gospel to everyone.
And so they go to Philippi to start telling people about Jesus and to build a core team.
And they travel.
I mean, there's two days worth of sailing by ship over the Aegean Sea, and then they walk 10 miles to get to Philippi, and they get there.
And what do you do?
There's not one believer in the whole place.
Well, what we do is in this story is we're introduced to three individuals who become the core team of this new church plant in Philippi.
Three individuals who come together and what I wanna do is simply introduce them to you and then we'll talk about how a church can thrive in a pagan city, whether it's Philippi or Los Angeles.
All right, so let me introduce these three core members to you.
It starts off with
Lydia and Lydia we meet in Acts 16 and we're told
that Lydia is from Thyatira.
Now, this is in the Roman province of Asia.
It's a long ways away from Philippi, which is in Greece.
So we learn early on that Lydia is mobile.
She's independent.
And as we learn next, she would have been wealthy because she was a seller of purple goods.
So this is likely referring to clothing and purple dye was very expensive in the ancient world.
So it would always be associated with wealth and luxury.
is a high-end fashion designer.
That's what she's doing.
She's supplying the upper echelon of the people of Philippi with the clothes that they're wearing, with the things that they're putting in their homes.
She's wealthy, she's independent, and not only is she selling expensive stuff, we know she's wealthy because she owns her own home.
And this isn't even where she's from.
She's an international traveler.
And so Lydia is front diatira.
cellar of purple goods, and they were told that she was a worshiper of God.
Now what this means is that she wasn't a Jew, but she was worshipping the God of the Jews.
So she's in this Greco-Roman context where everyone believes in all these different Greek and Roman gods, but she had this curiosity, something about her that she was drawn to the God of the Jews and she was learning and growing in these ways.
And so Lydia is there in Philippi.
And what happens is that Paul and Silas come to Philippi and normally what they do is they go to a city and they find the synagogue and they go there.
But in Philippi, there's not even a synagogue.
A synagogue would require 10 male Jews to have, they didn't even have that.
So they go outside of the city by the river and there's some women who are getting together to pray.
And Paul and Silas go up to these women by the river and begin talking with them and find out that they're worshiping the God of the Old Testament.
And so they have a conversation and it says that the Lord
Opened Lydia's heart.
This is the key that she's searching but her heart had been closed closed and she hears the good news of Jesus proclaimed by Paul and Silas the Lord opens her heart and it says that she was baptized her and her whole household She's dipped into the water representing that she's dying to her old self She's rising from the grave united with the resurrected Jesus and then
She immediately invites them to her house.
She invites Paul and Silas into her home.
So that's Lydia.
She's the first Christian in Philippi.
She's the first part of the core team of this church plant.
Then we go on and the next person that we meet is a slave girl.
This slave girl, we don't know much of her story, but we know that it would have been rough.
This was a girl who had been sold into slavery, separated from her parents, from her family, lost any agency, power that she had over her own life.
She's at the whim of her owners.
And we're told that this slave girl had a spirit of divination.
In the original language of Greek, and this is in Greece, in the original language of Greek, this literally says a spirit of a python.
What that means is that the Greek God Apollo, there was a temple nearby for him, and they had snakes that would protect the temple.
And they believed that Apollo would sometimes be embodied as a python.
And so there were women who were seen as snakes protecting the temple of Apollo, and she would have been one of those women.
So she had a spirit of a python.
She's tormented by evil spirits within her.
And then it says that she also, her owners had much gain from her fortune telling.
So by these evil spirits, she has the power to predict the future.
And she does this in such a way that people will come and pay large amounts for, but she's not getting that money.
What we learn about this slave girl is that she's being exploited.
She's owned by somebody else.
They make her do this and then they take all the profits from her.
She's been completely exploited.
She has no agency or power in and of herself, but she's used by others, reduced as an object to make money for them.
And so what happens is Paul and Silas are going back to the river.
where they met Lydia at first.
And as they're going, this slave girl comes and begins heckling them.
These are servants of the Most High God.
And it says she's yelling this at them and she does it on and on.
It goes on for minutes and then hours and then days.
She won't stop.
This, Paul and Silas are being followed everywhere they go by this woman who's tormented by spirits and she's hackling them.
And we're told that Paul is greatly annoyed.
I mean, I love this.
It shows the humanity of Paul.
Like we imagine Paul everywhere he goes, like he's praying, he's walking in humility.
Like Lord Jesus, like the picture that we get here is Paul's annoyed.
Like, you know, when you're trying to focus and there's a mosquito and you're like, I'm not gonna just focus.
The mosquito finally was like, you know, just start going after this mosquito.
Like Paul's there on a mission to preach Jesus.
He's got a heckler.
This slave girl's following him around, yelling at him everywhere he goes.
And finally, he gets so annoyed that he turns and says, in the name of Jesus, I command you to come out of her.
And the spirit comes out of her.
She's set free.
It doesn't say explicitly that she's converted here, but
She's gotta be, because her story is put right in the middle of two clear conversion stories.
And this is someone who's being tormented by an evil spirit, and the spirit comes out, he's gone.
And so here's a woman who was set free.
She's been bound by demons, and she's set free.
She walks away, a different person.
But when
this slave girl is set free.
I'm sure it must have been a joyous occasion for her, but her owners were not happy about it at all.
Because what happened is she's no longer has a spirit of divination.
She's no longer a fortune teller predicting people's future based off of an evil power.
And so what happened is that disrupted
the finances of her owners.
They lost their means of gain in this woman's ability.
And so they were angry.
It says that they seized Paul and Silas and they dragged them before the rulers.
And they say, these Jews are disturbing our city.
They're advocating customs that are not lawful for us as Romans.
They're probably referring here to the proclamation that Caesar is Lord.
and saying that our ultimate allegiance is political to Caesar.
And these people say that Jesus is Lord, and that we should give ultimate allegiance to him.
They're saying, these Jews, they're not like us.
And they don't live the way that Romans live.
They're disrupting everything in our city.
And when they bring them before the rulers, the crowd gathers around.
The crowd joins in attacking them.
And eventually they strip them of their clothes.
They beat them with rods and they throw them in prison.
And so that's the second member of this core team.
It's a slave girl.
We've got Lydia.
She's wealthy fashion designer.
And then you've got the slave girl who's been exploited and tormented by demons.
But that leads to the third member of this core team, and that is the Roman jailer.
And a jailer in this situation probably would have been a former soldier.
That's usually what they would have in their culture, is that they would have somebody who is a soldier and who no longer was.
They were good at that kind of thing.
They would become a jailer.
They would oversee the jail.
This Roman jailer would have been somebody who had lived through war and conquering and probably done horrific things.
Tough guy, rough around the edges.
And now he's a jailer.
He's a Roman, believes in the Roman gods like everyone else does in Philippi.
And so Paul and Silas are thrown into
this prison, and it says the jailer puts them in the middle where they have no fresh air, no sunlight, anything like that, puts their feet in stocks, and it says that night, at about midnight, that what were Paul and Silas doing?
They were praying and singing hymns to God.
I mean, can we just pause and acknowledge how amazing this is?
Like, I lock my keys in my car, and I'm like, Lord, you've abandoned me.
I forget to record a show that I want to watch.
And I'm like, God, why is life so hard?
Like we question God over the littlest thing.
Here's Paul and Silas.
They've just gotten beaten with rods, thrown in prison for preaching the gospel.
And what are they doing?
They're singing.
They're worshiping in the middle of the prison.
And I want you to notice a little minor detail.
It says, after midnight, Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God.
and the prisoners were listening to them.
Can you imagine?
They're in their praising God and these other prisoners are like, what is wrong with these guys?
Who are they?
Like they should be cursing their God and they're praising God?
Like what's going on here?
And the jailer must have heard him too.
It's after midnight, it's silent.
And yet Paul and Silas are crying out, praising God.
that they get to join in the suffering of Christ.
That they get to be a part of the beautiful work that God is doing of bringing His kingdom through service and sacrifice and suffering.
They're praising God, the jailer hears.
And then in the midst of that, an earthquake happens.
The walls shake, the shackles fall away.
And you can imagine that everyone in the prison, they look around like they can just leave.
And then we're told that the jailer sees this.
He realizes what's happened.
And the jailer knows that if everybody gets out, then he hasn't done his job.
He will lose his life.
And so the jailer takes his sword and gets ready to plunge it into himself.
And Paul cries out and he says, stop.
We're all here.
We're not going anywhere.
And the jailer, I mean, he's so confused.
He's shocked.
He's heard these men singing all night.
All of a sudden they have the chance to leave and they're not.
And he goes to them and says, fear and trembling.
And he says, what must I do to be saved?
He sees what they have.
He says, I want that what must I do to be saved?
And Paul says, believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved you and your entire household.
And we're told that the man believes.
He believes in Jesus.
He's baptized.
And then you know, he does.
He takes Paul and Silas to his house.
He washes their wounds, and he serves them dinner.
It's beautiful.
And yeah, what's amazing about this is that they went to the house, they do the baptism, they have a meal, they get cleaned up, and then they went back to the prison.
Because Paul and Silas, they didn't want this guy to lose his life.
So they knew if they escaped, that it would be on him.
So they literally go back to the prison.
And I want you to think about this.
I mean, it's an amazing story.
And you can look at this story in different ways.
At one level, you could hear this story and think, it's amazing and earthquake.
God delivered Paul and Silas from prison.
But that's not the point of the story.
The point of the story is not God's physical deliverance of Paul and Silas.
It's God's spiritual deliverance of the Roman jailer.
I mean, imagine them sitting in that prison.
Here's the question before this before they get released.
Who is really free?
Paul is suffering.
He's in chains, but he's rejoicing.
He's praising God.
He's free.
And yet the jailer, he's got the key that unlocks everything, but he's the one who's enslaved.
This is a story.
about how a Roman jailer who'd spent his life worshiping pagan gods, how he is set free by the grace of God.
And so this is the core group of the church plant in Philippi, Lydia, the slave girl, and the Roman jailer.
And I want you to
get a feel for how radical it is of these three people coming together.
This being the core group of a church plant, like nobody would choose this.
So let's imagine these people as Angelenos, okay?
So Lydia, she's the fashion designer.
She lives in Beverly Hills.
She's driving a nice car.
She's wearing her Prada and her Saint Laurent and all the nice stuff.
She's got all the high-end stuff.
She's got her luxury fashion place on Melrose, like that's Lydia, okay?
And then there's the slave girl.
Maybe she's like a young homeless girl in downtown who was forced to into prostitution.
and has lost everything.
She's destitute, and she's tormented by demons.
And then there's the jailer.
Maybe I think of a retired police officer in North Hollywood.
He's done his time, but he needs to make a little extra money, so he's a security guard at night.
So imagine this, three very different people, a successful fashion entrepreneur in Beverly Hills, a young woman trapped in exploitation in downtown LA, a retired officer working security in the valley.
They would never be in the same room.
They don't share the same zip code, friend groups, social media feeds, and yet in Act 16, those kinds of people are in the same church.
And that's the point.
The gospel doesn't just save individuals.
It creates a community that would never assemble naturally.
That's what happens in Philippi.
And so what I want you to see is this isn't just a story of three amazing conversions.
This is three people who meet Jesus and then who are formed into a community that's called a church.
And so in verse 40, the very last
verse of this chapter.
It says that Paul and Silas, that when they do leave prison, they go back to Lydia's house and it says that they see the brothers and sisters.
So what do you have?
You have these three random people in this story who most likely didn't even know each other, didn't cross paths from very different walks of life.
And yet they all meet Jesus and now they're family, brothers and sisters.
And here's the thing, this is the core group of this church plant.
But this church would go on and grow and thrive.
And we know that because Paul would write a letter to this church about 10 to 12 years later.
And we have it in our Bible.
It's called the book of Philippians to the church.
It's a letter to the church in Philippi.
And so this is the church plant in Philippi.
That's the core group, these three individuals.
that goes on to be a thriving church.
And so what can we learn from this?
I wanna talk about how a church can thrive in a pagan city and talk about, share five truths that we learn from this story about that.
So here's the first, how can a church thrive in a pagan city?
We have to know that the gospel grows the church.
And so when you look at this story, Paul and Silas planting the church, it's not their methods that do this.
Like it wasn't that Paul was so persuasive and intelligent with Lydia.
It says that the Lord opened her heart.
I mean, with the slave girl, it wasn't that Paul was like so powerful.
He was annoyed.
And yet God worked through him.
That woman encountered the power of the Holy Spirit that was stronger than any demon that had ever oppressed her.
And even with the jailer,
Paul didn't make an earthquake happen.
God's the one who shook the prison.
And it was the jailer's suffering that led him to ask, what must I do to be saved?
So it's not, it's not their methods that make this church grow and become what it is.
I mean, imagine Paul, like at a first century church planting conference and, and all these young church planners are coming up to him and they're like, Paul,
Man, I heard about the church in Philippi.
Amazing.
Like, I want to plant a church.
Like the church in Philippi, what do I got to do?
Give me the strategies.
You can't tell me how to preach.
Give me the mechanisms.
Like, what do I do?
I just imagine the apostle Paul saying, well, here's what you do.
You get heckled by a demon.
You get beaten by officers, thrown in jail, and then make an earthquake happen.
Works every time.
It'll be a great church.
No, here's the thing.
We actually know exactly.
how Paul looked back on this experience in Acts 16, because when Paul wrote his letter to the church in Philippi, after reflecting on all that for 10, 12 years, he says this to them in Philippians 1, 6, he said, I'm sure of this, that he who began a good work in you will bring it to completion at the day of Jesus Christ.
He who began a good work in you, did you catch that?
Paul's saying, I didn't start the church in Philippi,
I didn't begin that work.
It wasn't me and Silas that did great things.
God planted that church.
That's God's church.
God began that work in that church.
And he's the one that's going to grow it, that's going to sustain it.
It's going to use it to shine his light in the Roman Empire.
God's the one who did that.
And so the gospel is what grows the church.
Jesus builds the church.
It's his death and resurrection.
That's the power of salvation to the Jew and to the Gentile.
The Holy Spirit is the one who brings real change.
The father adopts us into a new family.
The gospel is what grows the church.
So let's apply this to our church right here in Los Angeles.
How can we thrive as a church in a pagan city?
Well, the danger is
when we think that that will happen by relying on mechanisms, formulas, and ministry strategies.
All you gotta do to plant a thriving church in Los Angeles is get a dynamic preacher, really talented worship band, slick Instagram profile, and a cool venue.
Then we'll grow.
It'll take off.
It'll be amazing.
Listen, that's trying to manufacture something by human strength that can only truly be created by the power of the Spirit.
I'll tell you this.
The only reason that we are here today as a church is because of the grace of God.
He began the good work that has happened here.
It's his grace that moves us forward.
The only reason we will continue to grow and be a gospel presence in this city is because of the grace of God and the power of the gospel.
And you know, as a pastor who's been here in LA now for 13 years, I get church planners coming to me and saying, what do I do?
I want to play a church like Reality LA, and we want to be in the heart of the city and proclaiming the gospel.
I'll share principles with them.
I'll talk with them about the importance of godly character and leadership and the need to preach the word and how you have to make disciples and build everything in your church around making disciples.
But at the end of the day, I say to these planters, I say, it's the power of the gospel.
Ministry is stewardship, being faithful with what God is doing.
And so the honestly, the best thing that you can do is pray.
Just cry out that God would move, that he would do it again, that he would reveal himself, that he would transform people.
That's what grows the church.
And look, I'm not down against,
like mechanisms or ministry strategies, those are great.
I'm not saying that systems and structures don't matter.
I like to think about it like this, like a trellis and a vine.
So if you go up to Napa Valley and you look out over a vineyard, what you'll see is you'll see lots of vines with grapes growing on them.
It's beautiful, but you'll notice that they're upon trellises, these wood frames that are built.
And so with
a vineyard, it's about the vine.
The vine is what produces the fruit.
But you need a trellis, which is the framework, to make sure that the vine is growing in the right way, not getting choked out by weeds and whatnot.
And so when we talk about the church, it's about the vine.
It's about life in Christ, abiding in Him, the ministry of disciples, making disciples, seeing people,
who don't know Jesus, become followers of Jesus and getting connected in community and sent out a salt and light in the city.
That's what it's about.
But we need some trellis.
We need some structure to make sure that that's happening well.
We need to make sure that we have staff that is making sure that all the finances that we have are dealt with in a way that's above reproach.
We need communication so people can understand what's going on and how to be involved in the right way.
We need people who are planning ministry programs and events and making sure that they're well coordinated so that people can get to them and so they can function well.
We need all of that, but here's the thing.
Like nobody goes to the vineyard and says, what a beautiful trellis.
Like that's amazing.
And if there were no vine, if all the vine died and it was just dust and nobody would go and celebrate the trellis, it's not about the trellis.
So we need to have healthy structures.
We need all of that.
Our staff does an amazing job, pouring, sacrificially, working so hard so that we have this so that you all can be equipped
to do the work of ministry.
So we need all of that, but it's not about the trellis.
It's about Jesus growing the church and us being united to him and proclaiming him and witnessing to him in word and deed in our lives.
And I'll tell you this, I want to experience more of the power of the gospel in our city so bad.
Los Angeles is filled with litias and slave girls and Roman jailers.
And only the gospel can transform them.
Only the gospel can reconcile them to God and bring them into a new family.
So how can a church thrive in a pagan city?
Well, we've got to know first that the gospel grows the church.
Second, we've got to know that the gospel is for all people, all people.
And some of us have a stereotype in our minds of who might become a Christian.
When you think of like somebody who you wanna pray for, that they might become a Christian, you might think of a person, they dress a certain way, they talk a certain way, they look a certain way.
That's the kind of person who might become a Christian.
And you probably have a stereotype of the kind of person who would never become a Christian.
Well, this passage makes clear that the gospel is for all people, people of different genders, ethnicities, classes, spiritual backgrounds.
And I'll tell you this, these three people who made the core group of the church plan in Philippi, they could not be more different from one another.
In fact, let me show you this.
Look at this chart that I have here.
And look at how different these three figures are in every way.
I mean, you've got ethnically, so Lydia is Asian, the slave girl is most likely Greek and the jailer is a Roman.
And then you've got economically,
Lydia is wealthy.
The slave girl is poor and the jailer is middle class.
And then spiritually, Lydia was seeking the slave girl was opposed and the jailer was indifferent.
That they couldn't be more different people from different types of backgrounds.
And yet,
The gospel crosses ethnic lines, economic lines, and spiritual starting points.
This is the core group of the church plant in Philippi.
The gospel's for everyone.
It's amazing.
And I tell you what, there would have definitely been some tension.
There would have been some messiness in this core group and in this church plant.
Because all these different differences that they had, they would have brought in different personalities.
different political understandings, different experiences, different levels of maturity, emotionally, mentally.
In every sense, it would have been messy and difficult, and yet it was beautiful.
It's the gospel bringing these people together.
And so what would it look like?
What would this look like in Los Angeles?
Well, at one level, we're already experiencing this.
So we literally have fashion designers in our church,
We have people in our church who used to be fortune tellers.
And we have a jailer in our church.
So we've got this.
And beyond that, seriously, we have people from different ethnic backgrounds, socioeconomic backgrounds and spiritual backgrounds.
And yet we've been transformed by Jesus and are a part of the same family.
God is still working in these ways.
He's the same God.
We're a part of the same story.
But we want to see more of this.
We want to see people from all walks of life encountering Christ and being brought into his family.
So whoever it is that you might assume they would never become a Christian or the Gospels not for them.
Those are exactly the people that you need to start praying for and that you need to build relationships with and show the love of Christ to and show the Gospel with them.
So the Gospels for all people
But the gospel doesn't just reach people from various backgrounds.
Next, we learn that the gospel reaches different people in different ways.
This is incredible.
So think about what happens with these three different individuals who make up this core team.
So Lydia is converted through words.
So it's a conversation with Paul and Silas where they're engaging with things intellectually and they're going back and forth and the Lord opens her heart and she becomes a Christian.
So Lydia was converted with words.
For the slave girl, it was power.
She encountered a power in the Holy Spirit that was far beyond the power of any demon that had tormented her.
So for her, it was power for Lydia, it's words for the slave girl's power.
And for the jailer, he encountered the gospel through suffering.
So his world shakes literally.
He finds himself in despair and he's at the point of getting ready to take his own life.
And those are the circumstances.
It leads him to trusting in Christ and becoming a Christian.
And so we need to recognize that the gospel is powerful and will reach different people in different ways.
And sometimes when we think of evangelism, I think we might be tempted to think only about like Lydia's situation words.
like sitting down, having a conversation with someone, explaining the gospel to them, that's important.
And the proclamation of the good news is essential.
But we also need to be aware that people are going to become Christians through power encounters, through healing, through being delivered, through radical experiences with God.
And we need to pray for that.
People are also going to become Christians through suffering, that they are gonna get to a place where their world is shaken,
where they don't know where else to look, and they look to God.
And we need to be there to proclaim the gospel.
And look, that's not taking advantage of someone when they're suffering, of telling them about Jesus.
It's bringing a real remedy to real brokenness.
Often times it's in suffering where we realize that we're really not in control of our own lives.
We really aren't the master of our own destiny.
And where we, it's in those moments of suffering, loss, and pain,
where we look to God who really is in control, who is sovereign, who is good, and who loves us.
So the gospel reaches different people in different ways.
The fourth truth that we learn from this story is that the gospel makes strangers family.
So like I said, this isn't just a story of three individuals.
It's the beginning of a new community in the city of Philippi.
They become brothers and sisters.
That's how the story ends.
Paul visits them, sees the brothers and sisters in the church.
So the gospel takes people who are strangers and makes them families.
And you see this.
I mean, how this church goes on and becomes a church family that's established.
So when Paul writes the letter to the church in Philippi, a decade later, he says this.
to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi with the overseers and the deacons.
That's amazing.
I mean, 10 years later, they've got established leadership structures.
Who knows?
Maybe some of these three were some of those overseers and deacons.
And he says, you're saints.
You're not a slave girl.
You're a saint.
You're not a fashion designer.
You're not a jailer.
You're a saint.
You've been made holy by Jesus Christ.
And then he says to them,
in this letter in verse three through five, he says, I thank my God, and all my remembrance of you, he's reflecting back on them.
And he says, because of your partnership in the gospel, that word partnership is coin ania.
It means fellowship, it's talking about shared life, shared mission, shared hope in Christ.
And so it's the power of the gospel that's taken these strangers from different backgrounds and made them family.
It's one of the reasons that you see this radical hospitality in this chapter.
I mean, did you notice that Lydia opens her heart?
Actually, God opens her heart and then she opens her home.
She invites them into her home right away.
The gospel makes us hospitable.
Did you catch that with the jailer?
That as soon as he believes in Jesus and trusts in him, what does he do?
He washes them of their wounds, invites them into his home, and makes him dinner.
The gospel makes us hospitable because we are a people who have been welcomed in by Jesus and therefore want to welcome others to say there's a place at the table for you.
So the gospel makes strangers family.
And then lastly, we learned from this passage that the gospel disrupts the order of the city.
We need to hear this because there's a temptation to believe that the gospel is private and belongs only in the realm of personal spirituality.
And then our society reinforces this, telling people, look, you can believe whatever you want as long as you keep your religious beliefs to yourself.
But passages like this remind us that the power of the gospel cannot be limited to personal spirituality.
The gospel impacts all of life and speaks not only to the heart, but to the public sphere.
The kingdom is not a picture of your best life now, but a vision of the world reordered around the powerful love of God.
Think about what happens in Acts 16.
This slave girl was being tormented by demons.
She was also being exploited by her owners.
And when she is set free, it upsets the owners because it impacted them financially.
Then what do they do?
They go bring in government officials right after that and it disrupts the whole order of the city.
And you see this throughout the gospel or throughout the book of Acts, Paul's not trying to go and disrupt cities.
He's going and preaching the gospel, but it brings disruption socially, economically, politically, culturally.
I mean, can you imagine if so many people in Los Angeles got saved at the porn industry shutdown?
Can you imagine?
If porn stars became followers of Jesus and said, I'm not doing this anymore.
If the videographers and the sound technicians and the producers, they said, man, I believe these people are made in the image of God.
I will not reduce them to a sexual object any longer.
What if that happened?
And the porn industry shut down.
What if so many people in Los Angeles became Christians that fentanyl distribution dried up?
Because drug dealers were getting saved and say, I'm not doing this anymore.
Can you imagine if so many people in Los Angeles met Jesus that plastic surgery clinics saw fewer clients because people actually believed that they were fearfully and wonderfully made?
Can you imagine if so many people in Los Angeles were transformed by the grace of Jesus that all the kids in Los Angeles foster care system got fostered or got adopted because they know that we've been adopted into the family of God and we want to be into an adoptive people?
These are things that could happen.
And I know, I know that some of you are saying that sounds great, but that would never actually happen.
You know, that's probably what people said in the first few centuries in the Roman Empire, when it was a common practice to throw unwanted babies in the dump.
It's what they used to do in the Roman Empire.
And usually, if it wasn't a son, they wanted a son.
And if they had a daughter, they might throw her in the dump and let the baby die.
But you know what Christians did?
They started going into the dumps.
and pulling out the babies and taking care of them, starting orphanages.
And they did this so much that eventually that practice, people stopped, changed the Roman Empire.
You know, people probably would have said that would never actually happen about the abolition of the slave trade in Britain.
And yet there were Christians who believed in the gospel, who saw the social implications of it, people like William Wilberforce and a group called the Clapham sect,
that stood up for the dignity of all people, and it did lead to the abolition of the slave trade in Britain.
People, you know, in America, in the South, probably would have said segregation will never be over with.
And yet there were Christians, like Martin Luther King Jr. and Fred Shuttlesworth, and many others who believed that all people are made in the image of God and saw the implications of the gospel in all of life, who stood up and genuine change happened.
And so we think, yeah, we can praise God for that.
We think that industries are immovable, but Rome thought that infanticide was immovable.
Britain thought the slave trade was an economic necessity.
The South thought segregation was permanent.
And yet, when the gospel takes root deeply enough in a people, it doesn't just save individuals, it rearranges public life.
That's what we see in Philippi.
That's what we can see in Los Angeles.
And so the gospel transforms individuals, brings them together as a church, and it impacts the whole city.
And honestly, that's why we're here as a church in Los Angeles.
And by God's grace, we've been planted in the city.
And we want to thrive, we want to bear fruit, we want to spread the seeds of the gospel and pray that the Lord would move.
And I want us to close by going back to the question that the jailer asked in his low moment.
He said,
What must I do to be saved?"
You know, people may not word it exactly like that, but that's the same question that people in Los Angeles are asking.
Everyone's longing for salvation.
We just look to functional saviors like our career or our reputation or money or ultimately ourselves.
People are looking to be saved.
And the jailer asks, what must I do to be saved?
And how do you think people would answer that question?
People in Los Angeles would probably say, well, I would guess that Paul would say, you gotta get your act together.
You gotta stop doing that thing that you keep doing that you know is wrong.
You gotta go back and make up for every wrong thing that you've done in life.
You gotta work your way to God.
That's what people would naturally think the answer to this question, what must I do to be saved is?
Well, Paul says, when the jailer says, what must I do to be saved?
He simply says, believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved.
Here's the key.
It's not, you don't have to do anything.
In fact, it's the wrong question, what must I do to be saved?
It's nothing that you do.
It's believing in what Jesus has done for you.
And what that is, is that He died on the cross for your sins.
That's how you can live with freedom.
That's how you can live with no guilt and no shame because Christ died for your sins so that you can be forgiven.
And what else did He do for you?
He rose from the grave.
That's why you can live a new life, not on your own strength, but by the resurrection power of Jesus Christ.
Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved.
Believe, follow him and get baptized.
We're gonna do baptisms on Easter coming up.
Some of you are in that place.
Maybe today you're ready to believe or you have believed.
Get baptized.
That's what Lydia does.
That's what the jailer does.
They believe and they are baptized.
I just want to close with this.
I've referenced already how this church was dear to Paul's heart.
He followed up with them.
He wrote another letter to them.
And in that letter, a decade later, he just comes back to the same basic truths.
He wants to keep calling them back to what saved them, the good news of Jesus, and for them to know that there's nothing better.
the knowing him.
Here's what he said to them in Philippians three verse eight.
He says, indeed, I count everything is lost because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus, my Lord.
For his sake, I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish in order that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own, but that comes from the law, but that which comes through faith and Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith, that I may know him.
and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, that by any means possible, I may attain the resurrection from the dead.
That was their hope from beginning to end.
That's our hope from the beginning to the end, to believe that Jesus is Lord, that he died and that he rose, and that nothing compares to knowing him.
Pray with me.
God, we thank you so much for the incredible work that you did in the city of Philippi.
And Lord, we thank You that You've been doing that work in cities all over the world.
You've done it here in Los Angeles.
And God, we just want to see more of that.
We want to see not only our church, but other churches in this city thriving, where people are being encountered by Jesus and they're coming from all walks of life, but they're being made family in Christ.
And so God, help us to be faithful stewards, to be,
deliberate and diligent about making disciples and having healthy structures and all of that.
But God more than anything, we pray that your spirit would move.
Pray that your son Jesus would build his church.
And Lord, we will give you all the glory for that.
We pray this in your son's name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening.
For more audio and video content, please visit realityla.com.